---
layout: post
title:  "Rosie v1.0 Preview #6: If You Know Regex, This Is Rosie"
date:   2017-08-30
categories: preview
---

RPL has many concepts in common with regex, and the syntax of RPL reflects this.
So if you know regex, you know a lot of RPL already!

[Rosie Pattern Language (RPL)](https://rosie-lang.github.io/doc/) is more
powerful than regular expressions (regex).  RPL can express every pattern that
regex can, as well as recursive patterns (like html, xml, json, and
s-expressions) that regex cannot.  But RPL has so much in common with regex that
it's easy to get started.  Let's look at the concepts that are the same, and the
ones with small (but important) differences.

<!-- The case for PEGs: -->

<!-- * Everything regex can do -->
<!-- * And more, like matching recursive structures (e.g. xml, html, json, s-expressions) -->
<!-- * Simpler mental model, because backtracking is explicit (ordered choices, -->
<!--   greedy repetitions, and both are possessive) -->

## Familiar concepts

The following RPL concepts are nearly identical, and have nearly identical
syntax, to their regex counterparts.

#### Repetition

|  RPL expression    | Matches                             |
|  --------------    | -------                             |
|  `pat*`            | Zero or more copies of `pat`     |
|  `pat+`            | One or more copies of `pat`      |
|  `pat?`            | Zero or one copies of `pat`      |
|  `pat{n}`          | Exactly `n` copies of `pat`           |
|  `pat{n,m}`        | At least `n` and at most `m` copies of `pat` (`n` defaults to 0 and `m` to unlimited) |

Repetition in RPL is greedy and possessive, which are not the defaults for
regex.  In other words repeated patterns in RPL will always match as many copies
as possible (greedy), and will not backtrack to try fewer copies (possessive).

In practice, this speeds up the matching (less backtracking), but more
importantly, it simplifies the mental model of how matching works.  Keeping in
mind all the ways that regex can backtrack requires much practice, and is a frequent
source of errors when writing regex patterns.  RPL backtracks only where there
are explicit choices, so understanding an RPL expression is more like
understanding `if-then-else` logic.  (See [the section on choices](#choices), below.)

#### Character sets

|  RPL expression    | Meaning                                              |
|  --------------    | -------                                              |
|  `[:name:]`        | Named character set (see *note [a]*)               |
|  `[:^name:]`       | Complement of a named character set |
|  `[x-y]`           | Range of characters, from `x` to `y` (see *note [b]*)  |
|  `[^x-y]`          | Complement of a character range |
|  `[...]`           | List of characters (in place of `...`) |
|  `[^...]`          | Complement of the character list `...` |
|  `[cs1 cs2 ...]`   | Union of character sets `cs1`, `cs2`, etc. (E.g. `[[a-f][0-9]]`) |
|  `[^ cs1 cs2 ...]` | Complement of a union of character sets |

*Note [a].* In Rosie v0.99k, the named character classes are the familar Posix ones:
 `alpha`, `digit`, `space`, etc.  Coming, in Rosie v1, will be character
 classes built from Unicode properties including category, script, and block.

*Note [b].* In Rosie v1, the meaning of `[x-y]` will be "all the characters whose
 code points (in Unicode) are between the code points of `x` and `y`, inclusive.


In addition to the ability to specify character sets based on Unicode
properties, additional character set operations are forthcoming.  Notably, the
ability to specify the *difference* and the *intersection* of arbitrary
character sets will be supported.

#### Look around

|  RPL expression | Meaning                                              |
|  -------------- | -------                                              |
|  `> pat`         | Look ahead at `pat` (predicate: consumes no input)                       |
|  `< pat`         | Look behind at `pat` (predicate: consumes no input)                       |
|  `!pat`         | Not `pat`, i.e. not looking at `pat`.  Same as `!>pat`. 

Here, we have greatly simplified the regex syntax for the "look around"
expressions *lookahead* and *lookbehind*.  The parentheses and the leading `?`
that are needed in regex are not needed here.  And, we have made the symbols for
lookahead and lookbehind symmetric, using left-pointing and right-pointing angle
characters.

There is no special expression for negative lookbehind, because RPL expressions
compose.  We can simply write `!<pat`, which means "not looking behind at
`pat`".  For what it's worth, `<!pat` is equivalent, though technically it means
"looking behind at something which is not `pat`".

#### Sequences

|  RPL expression | Meaning                                              |
|  -------------- | -------                                              |
|  `p q`          | Sequence: match `p` and next match `q`               |

In RPL, whitespace is ignored, so we can literally write `p q` (with a space
in between).

## Variations on regex concepts

#### Literals

|  RPL expression | Meaning                                              |
|  -------------- | -------                                              |
|  `"abcdef"`     | (String literal) Matches the string `abcdef`.        |

RPL uses identifiers to denote patterns.  You can define a pattern named `p` and
one named `q` and then write expressions like the sequence `p q` or the choice
`p/q`.  To match a string literally in RPL, you quote it to distinguish it from
identifiers. 

The pattern `"Hello, world"` will match only the input `Hello, world`, with
exactly one space after the comma.

Literals can contain familar escape characters like `\n` (newline) and also
Unicode codepoint syntax like `\u263b` (a smiling face: ☻) or `\U0001F63C` (cat face with
wry smile: 😼).


#### <a id="choices" />Choices (alternatives) 

|  RPL expression | Meaning                                              |
|  -------------- | -------                                              |
|  `p / q`        | Ordered choice: match `p`, and if `p` fails, match `q`  |

RPL supports *ordered choice*, not the "anything goes" alternation of regex.  To
emphasize the difference, we denote choice in RPL with a slash (`/`) instead of
the regex pipe (`|`).

As the name suggests, ordered choices are attempted in the order written.  And,
choices in RPL are possessive, meaning that once an alternate succeeds, none of
the remaining alternates will be attempted.

The notion of ordered choice, as well as the slash syntax, comes from [Parsing
Expression Grammars](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parsing_expression_grammar)
(PEGs), on which Rosie is based.

The way to think about ordered choice
is that backtracking occurs only within the choice expression.  For example,
consider the expression:
```
(p/q/r) s
```
It is a sequence of two other RPL expressions, the first of which is
the choice `(p/q/r)` (parenthesized for grouping, like we would write the
arithmetic expression `(k+1)*j` in a program).

The RPL matching engine will first try to match the pattern `p`.  If that fails,
it will reset (backtrack) to the position it was in when it started to match `p`, and it will
try `q`.  Failing that, it resets again and tries `r`.  If all of the alternatives fail, the
pattern fails.  If one of them succeeds, the engine continues by trying to match
`s`.  Here's the key: _If `s` fails, the entire expression fails._  RPL does not
backtrack to the choice and try a different alternative.  Once a choice
succeeds, the choice is locked in.

Of course, we can obtain the behavior of the regex alternation if we need it.  We just have to
write explicitly what we want to happen.  The RPL equivalent to the regex `(?:p|q|r)s`
would be:

```:::text 
{p s} / {q s} / {r s}
``` 

Two observations:

* The regex needs `?:` in order to use parentheses for grouping.  Otherwise,
  they both group and define a capture.  In RPL, captures are automatic, and not
  conflated with grouping.  More on this in future posts.

* Both parentheses `()` and curly braces `{}` are used for grouping in RPL.
  They differ when surrounding a sequence, in which case `()` effectively
  tokenizes the input.  The pattern `("nameserver" net.any)` will match the word
  `nameserver`, followed by a token boundary (such as whitespace), followed by a
  network address.  I.e. it will match ```nameserver 1.2.3.4```.


## Enhancements over regex

RPL has many enhancements over regex, and we will post about those very soon.
They include:

<!-- * Patterns are named, and new patterns can be composed by referring to existing ones -->
<!-- * Whitespace and comments are allowed in pattern definitions -->
* Captures are automatically named by their pattern identifier (not numbered!)
* Rosie can fully parse its input, giving a parse tree as output
<!-- * Input is automatically (but controllably) tokenized -->
<!-- * RPL patterns can be recursive, so RPL can be used to match -->
<!-- recursively defined structures -->
* RPL definitions can be put into a package, making it easy to share
* Rosie is built as a portable C library, with interfaces defined in several
  languages (including Python, Go, Ruby, and Node.js)
* And a **secret new feature:** An extensible macro facility will make it possible to
  write complicated patterns in a concise way, saving typing but also making
  patterns easier to read.  Anonymous sources high up in the Rosie project are
  unable to provide more information at this time.  🤐  Watch this site for more
  in the coming weeks!
  
## Move from regex to Rosie for scalable pattern matching

Building on so many familiar regex concepts, the learning curve is not too
steep.  And Rosie is a technology designed to save development time:

1. Avoid writing patterns at all, by reusing existing ones from
[available packages]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-07-01-Rosie-v1.0-preview-2 %})
2. No "driver program" needed (unless you want one) because the [CLI can output
   JSON]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-07-04-Rosie-v1.0-preview-3 %}), 
which can be piped into another application or saved
3. Trying out ideas (and debugging in general) is easy with the built-in REPL
   and [trace capability]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2017-08-12-Rosie-v1.0-preview-5 %})

This is how 
#[modernpatternmatching](https://twitter.com/search?q=%23modernpatternmatching)
is done.

<hr>

Follow us on [Twitter](https://twitter.com/jamietheriveter) for
announcements.  We expect v1.0.0 to be released around the celestial end of
summer, i.e. the autumnal equinox.

